I keep on saying it's true that
international law without politics is
ineffective but politics without respect
of international law risk to be criminal
and this is the reality we face
today our guest today on Center Stage is
Franchesca Alban the United Nations
special reporter in the occupied
Palestinian territories she's an
international lawyer with a focus on
human rights migration and the
displacement of refugees Alban has been
vocal and critical of Israel and its
Partners her assessments are blunt and
when describing Israel's actions in war
she does not hold
back franccesca Alan special reporter to
the UN on the situation of human rights
in the occupied Palestinian territories
welcome to center stage thank you from a
human rights perspective and from your
position how is this war in Gaza any
different from the previous Wars it is
different in the sense that it looks uh
more severe more cruel this is the sixth
war that the people in Gaza experien
since 2008 and uh it has been different
since the very beginning because it's
different the context because it it was
triggered by an attack and an attack
that inflicted serious pain uh upon
Israel and
Israelis I mean it has affected
thousands directly or indirectly but the
reaction
Israel's reaction is absolutely
unprecedented in the sense this is not
the first time that Israel invokes the
right of
self-defense but it's like if this time
it had um lost
all s all sense of limits all sense of
restraint and so the pr basic
principles of humanitarian law like the
principle of Distinction proportionality
precaution in military action
they've all been forfeited ever since I
started reporting on the wars on Gaza uh
we always say this is a disproportionate
uh retaliation from Israel to whatever
attack it is uh coming from uh from Gaza
proportionality is something that
usually is mentioned in international
humanitarian law in any war and uh in
this
case how would it be
proportional no but it's not it's not
first of all uh we shouldn't forget Gaza
was already under an unlawful blockade
which is a collective punishment so in
in a in a way
um I I've challenged since the very
beginning the logic that it was uh an
unprovoked attack which doesn't mean
that what Hamas and other military
groups Palestinian armed groups did uh
uh was was all lawful it was not because
it killed the moment you kill or Target
civilians then you you violate
international law but um there was no
justification to unleash a war against
the entire population and also the logic
the vocabulary the language that has
been used has escalated the
dehumanization of the Palestinians in
the sense the concept of Palestinians as
human Shields is not new but it's it's
been used on steroids as of the 7th of
October so all Palestinians are respon
in Gaza are
responsible uh the language that has
been used uh has been extremely
offensive and
derogatory and it has resulted in a
military in a series of military
operations that are totally
disproportionate I mean Gaza after four
months is destroyed when you took your
role in 2022 uh you immediately lifted
the the bar High in your first report as
special reporter when you recommended
that UN member states should develop and
I quote a plan to end the Israeli
settler Colonial occupation and upper
tide regime I guess you didn't make a
lot of friends with that report uh I'm
not sure because in fact it's a report
that uh attracted a lot of attention
what I did was to bring the discussion
back on the critical right that cannot
be realized until Israel maintain a
system of Oppression through apartheid
or an illegal occupation which is the
right to self-determination the right to
be free as to exist as a people but I
think that it it was important to to to
to rock the boat and to also remind
member states who have used the issue of
the two State solution discourse as an
empty Mantra hey guys there is some
content here and you cannot miss it why
do they keep missing it I think there is
a and now it's exposed I'm not saying
anything that is really um uh unknown
there's a lot of hypocrisy in
International Community this what's
going on now it's the uh the the the
epitome of double standards it's UNC
questionable the silence I would say
Western countries but not only Arab
countries are not necessarily better I
mean apart from a few
Exceptions there is a um a disconnect
between decision makers and reality and
reality both reality on the ground
because there is a genocide unfolding
either even the icj has recognized the
plausibility of genocide in a very short
time which is which is very significant
and no action taken but it is also a
disconnect between um civil society and
and common Ordinary People globally who
are taking the street in solidarity with
Palestinians wherever you turn your gaze
you see
people expressing solidarity with the
Palestinian PE with the Palestinians and
uh and asking for aisf fire and genocide
and the political and the political
landscape is paralyzed M speaking of the
icj ruling when they decided to take on
the case um a lot of people especially
the people under uh under attacks in
Gaza they were hoping and waiting for a
call for ceasefire from a legal and
international humanitarian law
perspective how do you look at this
decision of not calling for a ceasefire
I understand the people's deception
because ceasefire is the only thing can
that can stop the slaughtering of people
the Carnage on a daily basis that are
actually after the icj interim decision
there was even a a and an increasing of
violence which is which is shocking but
it it shows the Defiance of Israel for
international law at the same time if we
read the the icj's interim I mean the
provisional measures what they talk
about is a s fire because there is no
way to comply with these with these
measures other than stopping the the
indiscriminate bombing and the
destruction of Civilian infrastructure
the killing of Civilian so the only way
to fully comply with the order is uh um
by declaring and respecting as his fire
what I would have expected was that the
icj I mean the in a way the icj provided
the offered the ground for the
International
Community to change patterns to change
approach toward Israel what we saw was
the opposite and and uh yeah it's been
um we even
Soo big Powers who are who are like the
main pillars of the International
Community when you hold a a a member uh
seat at the U uh un Security Council you
should be upholding International
humanitarian law and international laws
and then you see those same Powers um
diminishing uh icj and doubting it your
job you keep repeating that your role is
to keep reporting on human rights and
making sure that it's being applied um
how how does this make your job easier
or harder in my position the the biggest
challenge is that I cannot visit the
occupied Palestinian territory because
of Israel's uh lack of lack of
cooperation with the Mandate um at the
same time you you I face like many the
an in transigence uh in the inter I mean
especially among Western countries um of
will of abide by international law which
I don't know if they realize the depth
and the gravity of of each day that goes
by without any hope for the Palestinians
without any respect for international
law because this erodes the basis for
for the validity of the international um
international law based system I mean I
keep on saying it's true that
international law um without politics
is ineffective but politics without
respect of international law is to be
criminal and this is the reality we face
today no matter how many uh arguments
based on facts based on laws you present
that you you are criticized highly
criticized by uh Israel by everyone
supporting it um why why do you think
that I mean I I and this is the thing
people ask me how do you cope with the
attacks I don't even pay attention
anymore because the reality on the
ground is so serious is so monstrous
it's so compelling that the only thing I
care for is that there is an an end to
this and an end that is not more
catastrophic than the present for the
Palestinians because they have endured
too much and of course I have a lot of
compassion for the Israelis as well but
it I mean we should we should always be
clear that the situation there is no
symmetry between the Israelis and the
Palestinians and the one without rights
between the River and the Sea are the
Palestinians so um the criticism I face
is from those who are biased those who
do not want to see or do not want to
acknowledge and do not want to address
this asymmetry in power and the fact
that there are an entire people which is
subjugated and has been subjugated for
decades but I still feel more the love
and the support of the so many around
the world who who recognize this mandate
and they they see it as a sort of a ligh
house in terms of I mean not to lose
hope in the International System it's so
humbling um your main concern now is for
this to stop now there are talks about
uh a ceasefire that might uh happen in
the few weeks maybe is it coming a bit
too late is it going to be enough well
it's not going to be enough but it's uh
it's uh it's necessary it's necessary
but not sufficient and it's necessary
because until the military operations uh
stop we won't see the end of The Killing
Mass killing in in Gaza but also Imagine
people who have been for four months
under a rain of
bombs not apart from the few days of
ceire in November the population in Gaza
has heard and and seen the the the
destruction really R pouring from the
the sky so the the level of trauma I
think it's beyond beyond repair we need
to face this so I'm also very concerned
with the with the day after I'm
concerned that the day after will not
allow if not handled proper properly my
result in force displacement of the
Palestinians you worked a lot on Force
displacement and especially Palestinian
refugees what how do you see all these
calls even um what
itar the national sec security minister
of Israel said we should give them
incentives to leave Gaza how do you see
it from Human Rights perspective it's
ethnic cleansing it's ethic cleansing
but this is not new I mean this is what
Israel has uh has signified this is what
Israel has done to the Palestinians
since the very beginning I mean since
even before existing as a state because
the first refugees were displaced uh and
never allowed to return as of December
194 7 so I've said from the very
beginning this war Isis to be the the
the largest distance of force
displacement in Palestinians history and
frankly if you need if you look at the
displacement inside Gaza has already
been because there are 1.4 million
people yeah almost 1.4 million people
who have been displaced from the north
into the South and there are almost 2
million people who who are displaced in
the sense they do not have a shelter
they do not have repair anymore they are
uh either in tents or in anra premises
um and this is unacceptable so I've
denounced that the risk I've warn
against the risk of ethnic cleansing
because under the fog of War this is
what Israel does
4749 1967 and this is again another
instance but also ethnic cleansing has
been the the the late motive of
Palestinians life under Israeli
occupation since the I mean even without
Wars because hundreds of thousands have
been displaced over time you just spoke
of hona you throughout your career you
worked at the Ona and now there's this
decision from major States contributing
uh States uh to defund Ona based on
accusations for only 12 employees of
allegedly uh being part of the 7th of
October the more we hear about it the
more we understand that the some of
these allegations are just like some of
the uh employees just said we're happy
we broke the prison or something similar
to this um is it fair no I'm reading
what comes out from the press and the
fact that probably I mean the
allegations might not be supported by
evidence I mean this is something that
was circulated yesterday in the media
and seem to be confirmed because no one
has seen the evidence that Israel claims
to have but let's assume that anra staff
participated in the seventh talk October
uh
attacks very serious very
serious um there should have been an
investigation and if proven true these
people should have been terminated and
then brought to Justice if they still if
they're still alive because again we
don't this is not what has happened anra
has terminated them in the interest of
the agency violating the the right of
due process right it did it because of
the criticism against the agency
but the fact that member states have
suspended funding to the agency is
absolutely immoral and in my view also
illegal it makes no sense from a logical
point of view because why would you
would you suspend the why would you
punish the agency at such a critical
moment and the agency as a whole
affecting the entire Palestinian refugee
population in the region at such a
critical time especially for those in
Gaza it makes no sense because why again
and why now after an icj ruling which
says that human humanitarian Aid is to
be assured and is to be increased at the
time where genocide is probably being
committed there is a risk of of
complicity of this country who have an
obligation not to Aid and abet uh the
legal the legal actions of Israel so
it's I mean I I wonder when I saw the
the the the information and the number
of states uh um going up but say have
they lost their mind we will see in the
coming days what happens uh we spoke a
little bit about the smear campaigns
against you but on the other hand uh you
are uh like the new hero uh of the new
generation of the Gen z uh there are
memes of you uh you are portrayed as the
superhero of human rights do you see
that there's a generational shift uh not
only towards Palestine but towards
upholding human rights in general yes
yes but I am so amazed at the youth
because I I really have well my hope for
the future comes from the young people
because you could see I mean and I
started realizing it with Greta tomberg
when this the the the mobilization that
she she triggered it's something that
sort of skipped my generation in many
respects but was so easy among people of
her age and of course I I mean it it
touches me um the idea of being
inspirational to young people makes me
really really happy also because they
need to believe in Justice they need to
believe in human rights because human
rights are like an armor but this is
something that people fought and died
for this is not a concession of States
these are the this is the gain of of
people who F fought against slavery who
fought for Farmers right for Women
rights minority rights indigenous people
rights so this is something that we need
to keep
alive um and and the future belongs to
them to young people the other thing is
being able to I mean human rights are
for the people not to be discussed in
universities or big conferences so and
if they do not mean make sense for the
people they don't make sense at all so
this unfolding genocide side caused a
lot of deception for everyone who
believes in human rights or the majority
of people who believe in human rights
who work in international humanitarian
law um it it sounds really shocking that
this is happening again even though we
pledged for years that it's never going
to happen again so what does IHL now
need to actually be able to stop a gen
side uh when it's happening or before it
even happens no I mean it's it's clear
that uh
the member states with a few exceptions
South Africa with a few exceptions have
proven unable or unwilling to honor the
genocide convention in in convention in
that part that obliges states to prevent
genocide we couldn't prevent the
genocide in uh in Rwanda we couldn't
prevent the genocide in Bosnia heroina
and we couldn't prevent other atrocity
crimes that have taken place and are
taking place right now how we speak in
Congo in Sudan there are so many crisis
that are forgotten and this is why I
think this this genocide is is
mobilizing people globally for a number
of reasons because because of the double
standards and I think that people have
enough both in the global South and in
the global north of these double
standards perpetrated by Western
countries the second is that Palestine
epitomize this uh this struggle for
justice and this resistance to settler
colonialism colonialism has transformed
but settler colonialism has most most of
the cases won over the native uh the
indigenous people in Palestine not yet
and and I do believe that there is a way
for Israelis Israeli Jews and
Palestinians to to live together in that
land but it cannot happen without
equality freedom and dignity Dignity of
all and this is the struggle now uh
people I mean my fear right now is that
uh the powerful states might be pushing
in the face of a genocide might be
pushing for a return to the status quo
which is gone it's broken forever it's
gone and at the same time they they seem
to be pushing for a return to the status
quo so yes let's discuss about the
two-state solution when it's very
difficult to to make it materialize
while what the Palestinians need because
they are claiming Unity of the people in
the land Unity of the land so it's
dismantling the aparte this is the only
way forward thank you very much
Francesca alanza thank
[Applause]
[Music]
you